>> The Western lifestyle is
built on a fight or flight mode.
Everything is go, go, go.
This response disconnects
people from themselves.
>> It's about raising
people's awareness,
opening up their consciousness,
opening up their horizons.
>> My work day starts at 5:30
in the morning when I wake up.
And usually, I'm going
a million miles an hour
until I fall into bed.
>> I'm a type 2 diabetic,
diagnosed about a year ago.
>> I lost my mother
two years ago.
>> I got up in the morning one
day and was kind of just going,
oh, god, I really
need some help.
>> I was shaking and
struggling to breathe.
>> I've been to
a lot of doctors.
And he's gave me a percentage
of have a heart attack.
And his answer was 18%.
But it should be 1%.
>> I went in for a very standard
eye surgery that went horribly
wrong.
>> I've been having cameras down
and off to the doctors and off
to hospitals.
>> The depression that
just comes, I just--
again, just close off.
And I can't really function.
>> There's a place
down in Thailand,
says it can actually
change your head around,
change your inner space around.
>> I actually feel different.
It's so bizarre.
>> Heading for a retreat on an
island in the north China sea,
Nick Knowles joins a group who
are all seeking the antidote
for the strains of modern life.
How will the gang cope with a
completely new way of living?
>> I think that some of the
participants didn't really know
what they were getting into.
>> It's almost cultish.
>> I think it's going
to be a challenge.
>> Will 28 days of detox and
alternative therapies be enough
to change their lives?
>> This is one kick-ass detox.
>> Welcome to Thailand.
>> Previously on "The Retreat--"
>> Nick talked about kind of
an as-- like an out-of-body
experience today.
>> I suddenly found was
going outside and going down
and looking at the
bottom of my feet.
And then I thought, what
the hell's going on?
[LAUGHTER]
>> It's just madness really.
>> Peace with them, be at
peace, not in the stress.
You should live relaxing.
>> If I watch all my thoughts
go by, I will end up sitting
on an island here and not
looking after anybody.
>> This is why we have
to learn together.
I would like to
invite everybody, come
and enjoy walking meditation.
>> I don't see how he gets
to lecture me on what part
of my life I'm missing out.
>> After many days
of new practices,
the weekend presents more yoga,
this time with a difference.
>> Where's my lift?
>> Shakti takes the gang
out onto the beach--
>> Come on then.
>> --for a lesson in harnessing
their inner energies.
>> Qigong really changed my
life because it just opened up
my thinking.
And it gave me so
much more energy.
It's really beautiful.
>> We had something
jumped on the boat.
>> What we're doing is we're
connecting to the elements
of nature.
And we're connecting
to the elements that
are within us, our own nature.
When that happens, you
push out what you're not.
So all the illusions, all
the rubbish, all the toxins,
all the emotions that get
in the way, the confusion,
is what we release.
And then we connect to the pure
core of what we really are.
This is how it
improves our health.
OK, so we're going to do
Five Element Qigong, which
is connecting to the five
elements-- fire, water, air,
matter, and consciousness.
It will bring you out of
your head and into your body.
And it's really about feeling
and just going with the motion.
So copy what I'm doing.
I'll just say things
like-- like this.
And if you need
adjustments, I'll
come round and give
you adjustments.
But just flow with
me, all right?
And then from that
point onwards,
we can enjoy the sunset, enjoy
the elements that are around us.
It was in the warmup and
yeah, where we're tapping
and we were just waking up
the meridians of the body
and getting the energy flowing--
Smile.
To the right side and the left.
--and Nick walked off,
which was I found actually--
I found that quite rude.
>> It's not for me.
>> I'm not here to prove myself
or to get people to jump through
hoops or to do anything that
they don't particularly want
to do.
But at least give it a go and
then speak from your experience.
And he didn't even do that.
So--
[RELAXING MUSIC]
>> Having begun to
change their lives,
Dominique wants to ensure the
gang have the tools to continue
a healthy lifestyle back home.
But this being the
retreat, there's
always a surprise in store.
>> Are you thinking of
transitioning a little bit
to a healthier diet
when you go back home?
>> Yeah, yeah, yeah.
>> So we talked about that
a little bit last week,
about the transition
for the gut flora.
it's important because you're
going from a meat diet to a more
plant-based diet so
you want that to work.
And you might go to
the bathroom often.
Sometimes you might have more
like diarrhea-- not diarrhea,
but more soft stools.
It happens.
You can have constipation
because your gut
floras are not--
being selected by your body.
So it's normal.
You need to go through
that when you transition.
But to help yourself, you
can take the probiotics.
I don't know how much
alcohol you girls--
zero?
>> Is it pretty much
10 drinks a year?
>> No smoking?
>> Yeah, no smoke--
>> Yeah.
>> --smoked for 10 years.
>> And I'm off again.
Yeah, I've only-- it
was only smoking two
to three cigarettes
a day, also, Yeah.
I almost had a
nervous breakdown.
And it actually seemed to
help me, stabilized me.
>> It's fake pleasure.
It's fake pleasure.
>> But it got me through
a really rough time.
>> Yeah, as long as you made
the decision of not going back,
I mean, it's--
>> I don't want to be
a smoker, not at all.
>> Forgive yourself and--
>> I've decided
to go home early.
My journey here has
come to a natural end.
My gut instinct is
telling me to go home.
I'm never going to be a
full-on vegan, I don't think.
But I'm definitely
going to change my--
mine and my family's
diet at home.
Still, I can still go
back and lose weight.
Doesn't mean to say that
the second I leave here,
I'm going to stop.
>> George is going home?
>> Yeah, he's had enough.
>> Yeah, I've had
a chat with him.
You know?
Can he push it for another week?
But he's got young
kids in there.
>> Mm-hmm.
>> And I've spent my
life away from home, so.
>> We did some blood
tests when you arrived--
>> Yes.
>> --some blood tests yesterday.
Now I just received
the blood test.
>> No change?
>> No change at all.
>> I didn't think
there would be.
[LAUGHS]
>> You think there are changes?
>> Yeah, I would, yeah.
>> Do you feel
something different?
>> Yeah.
Obviously, I feel--
I know I've obviously
lost some weight because
I can see and feel that.
>> You lost 8 kilo.
>> 8 kilo?
>> Not bad.
>> It's all right for
three weeks, isn't it?
>> Yeah, you didn't do
high intensive workouts?
>> No.
>> No, not at all, no.
>> Just walk to the yoga--
>> Yeah.
>> --and eat some healthy food?
>> Not bad.
>> No, no.
>> We can start with
your blood pressure.
>> Yes.
>> When you started,
you were hypertensive.
So you had a blood
pressure of 150 over 91.
Now you are 121 on 64.
Bravo.
[LAUGHTER]
When you have high
cholesterol, you
had 248 of total cholesterol.
A good optimal cholesterol
level would be 150.
>> Right, so that
was very high then?
>> Yeah, very high.
You dropped to 178.
>> So still not
brilliant but better.
>> It is brilliant.
It's great.
I mean, you dropped so much.
>> Yeah, yeah.
>> It's incredible,
the difference.
And then the other
tests are quite amazing.
>> Right.
>> Most of the problems
were from your kidneys.
So you had your--
your BUN, that's your blood,
urea, nitrogen. So that
comes from the breakdown
of protein, basically.
When you're on a high
animal protein diet,
then you break down
a lot of nitrogen. So
that's in your blood.
So you were-- and your
kidneys filter that.
Now, I was telling you that you
had a lot of that in your blood.
So maybe your kidneys
were not working properly,
so you were high.
And now you're normal.
>> Yeah.
>> It went from
bad to pretty good.
>> Who knows?
6 months, 12 months'
time, could be a new man.
>> Exactly, I give you the two
thumbs up for your changes.
>> As word spreads of
Julian's departure,
the gang come to see him off far
healthier than when he arrived.
>> Bye, everybody.
>> Bye, Julian.
>> Thank you all very much.
>> Take care.
>> Love you all.
>> After Julian has come so far,
he completely surprises the gang
as the pull of home is just
too strong for him to resist.
>> I'm going to miss you, Jules.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah, and I'll see you soon.
>> Big love, man.
Big love.
>> See you.
Ciao Ciao.
[CAR HORN HONKING]
>> Bye.
>> With a Julian-shaped
hole in the gang,
an island hopping tour is
arranged to rebond the group
and raise morale.
[SOBER MUSIC]
Little do they know that in less
than 72 hours, another of them
will be gone.
For now, though, the
beauty of the islands
in this part of the South China
Sea is a majestic distraction.
[CHATTERING]
>> So how's Julian?
What were the results?
>> He's doing good.
He's on a good path.
>> Is he-- has he gone
from endangered to safe?
>> Yeah he went from five
minutes from a heart attack
to almost normal.
>> Wow.
>> Yeah.
>> And his weight?
>> His weight, 10--
8 or 10 kilos, he lost.
>> Blimey.
>> Actually, let's see whether
he's lost 8 or 10 kilos
or temporarily misplaced them.
[LAUGHTER]
>> He actually-- he actually
told me that his wife bought
a blender and a steamer.
And they wanted all do
this and change their diet.
>> Yeah, his kids are baking him
like vegan brownies and things
when he gets home.
>> Yeah, he told me.
>> Of course, he's
not going vegan.
But he's just going to
incorporate a little bit of what
he's learned here.
And when he saw the
results, it was a shock.
His kidneys are
functioning better.
And he's not as toxic anymore.
So it's all good news.
>> After Julian's results, a
vegan picnic on the beach tastes
that much better.
[PLAYFUL MUSIC]
Milton and Kathy have
taken their usual morning
walk to be the first of
the gang at the hospital.
They will all be tested
to provide their final set
of results and prove whether
their stay at "The Retreat"
has had a positive
effect on their health.
Some of the effects are more
immediately obvious, however.
And Billy's back to
full power at last.
With their increased energy, Ron
takes them all to burn some off
at a gym with a difference--
a Muay Thai gym,
Thai kickboxing.
[CHATTERING]
>> Kick for beginning.
For basic, for fighting.
>> Yes.
>> Hands up.
Hands up.
When you jab, jab,
thing for killing.
Back same, when you bam,
you bam for killing.
1, 2, chop, chop.
Body back into this.
Hands here.
When you kick, pa-pa, OK.
Yeah, yeah.
You come here.
>> Right.
>> You come-- no, no, no.
You come here.
>> [LAUGHS] I got you.
>> Yeah, Hup, hup, hup, hup.
>> OK.
>> Come on, come on, come on.
>> Right kick, yup,
right kick, yup.
>> Hup, hup.
>> I'm dead.
I'm very tired.
>> That was energizing.
I haven't lift my leg
that high for ages.
You know what I mean?
It's just getting-- just
remembering the movements
like the left, right.
He's got the bags
under the knee.
>> And the language barrier.
>> Yeah.
I was like, what?
>> Yeah, yeah.
But you kind of get the
grasp of what he's saying.
And you just get into the mood.
But it's good.
I really, really
enjoyed it, really good.
>> In the lineup,
they started with us.
And we were like, what?
>> What?
Yeah, I know.
>> What are we doing?
What are we doing?
Never been here before.
>> I think the yoga--
the yoga breathing
technique really
helps you as I'm trying to get
around the ring, knackered.
Breathing in through my nose,
getting it into my core,
feel it-- yeah, yeah, yeah.
I tried that one.
But he looked at me as if it
was going to knock me out.
[LAUGHTER]
>> How strong were they, though?
>> They're powerful.
They're powerful.
>> After a quick pit stop
to collect the others,
the gang are being taken out
for some well-earned relaxation
and reflection.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
On one of the highest
points in the island,
the gang are treated to
a view of Koh Phangan
from a spectacular angle.
>> Ooh, a jungle.
>> That's amazing, isn't it?
>> Yeah.
>> Now, that's one of
the islands out there?
>> It could be.
>> There's program on recently
where people gave up sugar
for two weeks.
We've given up sugar, caffeine,
alcohol, meat dairy, wheat.
>> Yeah.
>> Cigarettes.
>> Yeah, cigarettes,
everything, for a month.
>> Yeah.
>> I thought it was going to be
about getting myself physically
back in shape.
I wanted to lose weight.
And I wanted to get healthy
and with the food and things.
But in actual fact, it became
secondary and less important
than actually
slowing my mind down
and actually refinding myself.
And it sounds like such
a hippy thing to say.
But it's like-- but it's--
the simplest way of saying it,
it's like I've got my mojo back.
I'm suddenly really excited
about going back, going back
to work, going out and
going back into the world
and going back--
and being a full tilt.
>> It's like a little reboot.
>> Refresh--
>> I wish I'd done
it 10 years ago--
or 5 years ago, certainly.
>> Yeah, yeah.
>> But it shows that
the mental aspect,
which you weren't
expecting and the fact--
and being-- finding yourself.
But it also shows us, I
think, that everything is--
kind of works together.
So the food helps with that
aspect as well and the yoga
and that and the
self-control, that helps.
And so it's all these things
that help to better you.
It's brilliant.
>> See what you've done?
[LAUGHTER]
>> I think yoga and meditation
have some negative connotations.
>> See, I never wanted to do
meditation because I thought
the moment anybody
said meditation,
it sounded ridiculous.
>> I think it's about taking
the first step, though.
Some of those people
you don't think
would come, once they get here
and have a little taste of it,
they enjoy it
because it's almost--
>> So as you say, then,
when you're back at--
you're back working
on the cars--
>> Yeah.
>> --and you're in a line of
cars waiting for people to come
out and they go, oh, he's built.
I saw him go to that retreat,
doing all that yoga and
all that reiki and stuff,
a load of old codswallop, in it?
>> Yeah, but I tell them--
I tell them what
it'd done for me.
Do you know what I mean?
That chilled me out, got
me a bit more lively.
And that's what
it's done for me.
It makes you-- it does
make you stronger.
You feel stronger inside.
Your posture is better.
You're not slouching out.
You kind of-- look at him.
I've never seen him slouch
any day I've been here.
>> To be fair, you could iron
a shirt on him, couldn't you?
He's that upright, is it?
The other day when
we met the monk and I
wasn't particularly
impressed by the whole thing,
did that offend
you as a Buddhist?
>> You were talking about
him at a very personal level.
And it felt like you'd
missed the point of what
he was trying to say.
His life might not
be a hundred percent
without problems
or difficulties.
But he was carrying
a message and I
thought you shot the messenger.
So yeah, I did feel a
bit offended by that.
>> I think there's a
possibility that I did--
to a certain extent, that
I actually did do that.
It kind of irritated me, the
suggestion that somehow he's
got all the answers.
And we, in the West,
have got it all wrong.
>> Well, I don't think
he's got the answers.
But what he's saying is there
is a teaching that's 2,500 years
old that could be
really helpful.
>> Yeah, but that's
every religion says that.
>> I don't consider it
an organized religion.
And most Buddhists wouldn't.
But it is considered an
organized religion by--
>> But what bothered me about it
was the suggestion that somehow
in the West, because we don't--
we don't care for each other
and we don't care for ourselves.
And we don't-- we've
kind of lost our way.
>> I don't think he
was saying that, Nick.
I think you heard that.
But I don't-- that's
not what I heard.
You came here burnt out.
>> Yes.
>> And you help a lot of people.
So he was speaking
to you and about you.
He wasn't-- I didn't hear him
saying anything that wasn't true
for you or for me.
>> Yeah I suppose.
Again, it was very
easy for somebody who--
again, it's a bit personal.
But it's the person
rather than the message.
You're quite right.
I was more bothered by the
person than the message.
>> Organized religion
is one thing,
and I absolutely agree
with you about that.
But spirituality
is something else.
>> But then it's not going to--
not going to work
for everyone, is it?
>> What isn't?
>> Any of the process
that we've been doing,
it's not going to work--
some people aren't going to be
able to get through the-- get
through the fasting.
Some people aren't going to
be able to get through not
going to do the reiki.
Other people aren't going
to enjoy it in the way
that, it's been surprising
that people have on this.
>> There's a saying that--
>> I think people are more open
to it as a result of watching
this.
>> Well, there's three things
that I've been told that really
helped any kind of recovery.
And that's honesty,
open-mindedness,
and willingness.
And I think if people
come and they're honest
and they're open minded
and they're willing,
I think they'll get a hell of a
lot out of it at whatever level
they are and however
much they want
to open to other levels
of consciousness or not.
>> Yeah, I think you're right.
There you go.
We did find somewhere
where we agreed in the end.
[LAUGHS]
>> With Nick continuing to
wrestle with the more spiritual
aspects of the retreat, he goes
to look for Claire to talk about
her stresses as
a police officer.
>> You came here thinking
that you were suffering with
depression.
>> Mm-hmm.
>> Do you still believe that?
>> Um, I've had a lot of
different labels put on what I
was going through.
>> But then given
what you go through,
it would be surprising
if you didn't.
>> It's not surprising, yeah.
It isn't surprising.
And I don't think anyone--
I think people are shocked
because at work I appear OK.
So you try and hide the
effects it has on you.
But I think over time, you
can't get away from it.
>> And how many of your
colleagues do you think are
suffering and in silence and
not letting on that they're--
>> Probably quite a few.
[LAUGHS] Definitely with
stress, definitely with stress.
But I definitely enjoy my job.
And I love what I do.
And I do it to the
best of my ability.
And sometimes it doesn't
work out for the people
that you want to help,
and that is quite hard.
>> Well, I think rather than
being upset with yourself,
I think maybe that we as a
society have let you down by not
actually giving you the support
and making you understand how
valued you are.
>> Mm-hmm.
>> I think we as a society need
to find a way to make you feel
valued for what you do for us--
and not just you, but everybody
else that does the job.
As I say, you can't keep
facing the bad people
and have people scream
abuse in your face all day
without it causing effect.
And very rarely does
anybody writing out the blue
and go, by the way, thanks
very much for making sure there
are no burglars in my street.
>> Yeah, exactly.
I mean, don't get me wrong,
people do say thank you.
And it's nice.
But a lot of the
time, it's quite rare.
>> Because we need people, with
your kind of heart in the force,
don't we?
>> Yeah.
>> You can't just have
all really hard cases.
You've got to have
people with your heart.
>> I think I just need to work
out a way of not getting drawn
in too much to other
people's bad times.
[SOBER MUSIC]
>> Next time on "The Retreat--"
>> It's always better
to soak your nuts,
like you're trying to--
>> Sorry.
>> You can't say that.
>> Oh my god.
>> Yeah I could
walk for miles now.
I could walk for five
hours at my own pace.
But to walk this slow in this
confined space, it's control.
It does things to your mind.
Do you know what I mean?
>> I've had a phone
call from home.
And we've an illness
in the family.
>> And you just cut it
in nice-sized chunks.
OK?
>> I'd say to Kathy, that's
coming for a run in the morning.
Yeah, what time, 5:00?
I didn't know she wanted to come
for the whole process of doing
it.
>> My head feels brilliant.
My heart feels open.
>> Before attempting any of the
detox techniques or practices
demonstrated in "The Retreat,"
you are advised to seek out
your doctor's advice.
[WORDLESS SINGING]